.. _tutorial_part1:

Scenario: working with micro-services
=====================================

In this scenerio we'll see how Dodo Commands can be used to work with two micro-services.
It's probably over-kill to use Dodo Commmands in this simple scenario, but as the project
grows bigger, it will start to be worth it. To keep it simple the services are not Dockerized.

.. tip::

  In the tutorials we'll assume that Bash is used. In some cases we will source the output of
  a Dodo command using ``$(dodo <command>)``. In case you are curious what is being sourced, you can run
  the command without ``$()`` and source it manually on the command line.
  If you are using the Fish shell, then you can use ``dodo <command> | source`` instead of
  ``$(dodo <command>)``. In that case, be sure to also run `dodo global-config setting.shell fish`
  to tell Dodo Commands that you are using the fish shell.

.. tip::

  Parts of the tutorial that give technical details or explain more advanced features are kept separate
  from the main text. To not be overwhelmed, it's probably better to skip them on a first read.


Two simple micro-services
-------------------------

The first micro-service writes the time to a file in the ``/tmp`` directory, whereas the second
micro-service runs a ``tail`` command that tracks the contents of this file. The source code for these
services is found in ``part1/before`` of the dodo_commands_tutorial <https://github.com/mnieber/dodo_commands_tutorial>`_
repository. We will go ahead and clone the code for this part of the tutorial:

.. code-block:: bash

  cd /tmp
  git clone https://github.com/mnieber/dodo_commands_tutorial.git

  # Copy part 1 of the tutorial so that we can work with a short path
  cp -rf ./dodo_commands_tutorial/part1/before ./tutorial

Let's try out the services:

.. code-block:: bash

  cd /tmp/tutorial/writer
  # let this run for a few seconds, or run it in a separate window...
  make runserver

  cd /tmp/tutorial/reader
  # this will print some timestamps that were generated by the writer service
  make runserver


Setting up an environment
-------------------------

The next step is to create a Dodo Commands environment for working with our project:

.. code-block:: bash

  cd /tmp/tutorial
  $(dodo env --init tutorial)

  # Check that we are in the "tutorial" environment
  dodo which

      tutorial


.. tip::

  If something goes wrong during the creation of the Dodo Commands environment then you can delete
  the /tmp/tutorial directory and try again. In this case, you should also run
  `dodo env --forget tutorial` and run the clean up steps that it prints out (for reasons of safety
  Dodo Commands does not run these cleanup steps automatically).

The environment contains the following directories:

.. code-block:: bash

  # The project dir is where your project lives.
  # In this case, it's the directory where we called 'dodo env --init'.
  dodo which --project-dir

      /tmp/tutorial

  # The configuration directory is where the Dodo Commands configuration files
  # for the environment are stored.
  dodo which --config-dir

      /tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands

  # The environment directory is where Dodo Commands stores all other information
  # about your environment. Usually, you don't need to work with this directory directly.
  dodo which --env-dir

      ~/.dodo_commands/envs/tutorial

  # The (optional) python_env directory contains the virtual Python environment for your project.
  # In this case, we don't have any
  dodo which --python-env-dir

      (nothing here)

Working with the configuration
------------------------------

Each environment contains a set of configuration files:

.. code-block:: bash

  # The main configuration file is called config.yaml
  dodo which --config

      /tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands/config.yaml

  # Let's take a look at the configuration file:
  cat $(dodo which --config)

      ROOT:
        command_path:
        - ~/.dodo_commands/default_project/commands/*
        version: 1.0.0

Details: magic configuration values
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When we print the contents of the configuration, we see that some extra values
were added automatically:

.. code-block:: bash

  dodo print-config

      ROOT:
        env_name: tutorial
        command_path:
        - ~/.dodo_commands/default_project/commands/*
        - /some/path/to/dodo_commands/dodo_system_commands
        project_dir: /tmp/tutorial/part1
        config_dir: /tmp/tutorial/part1/.dodo_commands
        version: 1.0.0


Extending the configuration
------------------------------

You can extend the configuration in any way you like. Let's add the following section:

.. code-block:: yaml

  # (bottom of) /tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands/config.yaml
  MAKE:
    cwd: ${/ROOT/project_dir}/writer

Now, when we print the contents of the ``MAKE`` section, we get:

.. code-block:: bash

  dodo print-config MAKE

      cwd: /tmp/tutorial/writer

We see that we can interpolate values. In this case ``${/ROOT/project_dir}/writer`` was
interpolated to ``/tmp/tutorial/writer``.

.. note::

    From here on, we will use the notation ${/FOO/bar} to refer to the ``bar``
    key in the ``FOO`` section of the configuration file.

.. tip::

    Run the ``dodo edit-config`` command to open all files in the configuration directory
    in an editor. Set the ``config_editor`` field in the global configuration file
    (~/.dodo_commands/config) to the editor you wish to use (we recommend using gedit with the
    Side Panel enabled).



Adding an alias to run the writer service
-----------------------------------------

We'll now create a ``mk.py`` script that can be used as an alias for running the writer service.
This alias will serve as a shortcut to running `make` in the directory of the writer service.

.. code-block:: bash

  cd /tmp/tutorial
  mkdir ./commands
  touch ./commands/mk.py

Add the following code to ``mk.py``:

.. code-block:: python

  from dodo_commands import Dodo

  Dodo.parser.add_argument("what")
  Dodo.run(["make", Dodo.args.what], cwd=Dodo.get("/MAKE/cwd"))

We need one last step to ensure that Dodo Commands finds the new command.
Open ``/tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands/config.yaml`` again and edit
``${/ROOT/command_path}`` so it looks like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

  ROOT:
    command_path:
    - ~/.dodo_commands/default_project/commands/*
    - ${/ROOT/project_dir}/commands

Now when we run ``dodo`` (without passing any arguments) we get a list of all
available commands, and ``mk`` should be somewhere in that list. To run the
command, let's use the ``--confirm`` flag so we can check that everything is looking good:

.. code-block:: bash

  dodo mk runserver --confirm

      (/tmp/tutorial/writer) make runserver

      confirm? [Y/n]

We see that the command will run ``make runserver`` in the ``/tmp/tutorial/writer`` directory, great!


Using layers to run the reader and writer service
-------------------------------------------------

At the moment, the `mk` command operates on the writer service. What if we instead want to run the Makefile of the
reader service? As a first step to generalize our `mk` command we will move the ``${/MAKE}`` section to a new configuration file:
``server.writer.yaml``. This file should therefore look like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

  # /tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands/server.writer.yaml
  MAKE:
    cwd: ${/ROOT/project_dir}/writer

Then we add a similar file for the reader:

.. code-block:: yaml

  # /tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands/server.reader.yaml
  MAKE:
    cwd: ${/ROOT/project_dir}/reader

.. tip::

    Don't forget to remove the `MAKE` section from the main Dodo configuration file.
    To edit this file, you can run (substituting your favourite editor)
    `nano $(dodo which --config)`.

Finally, we will add a ``LAYERS_GROUP`` in the main configuration file:

.. code-block:: yaml

  # (bottom of) /tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands/config.yaml
  LAYER_GROUPS:
    server:
    - writer
    - reader

Now when we call ``dodo writer.mk runserver`` then Dodo Commands will look for a layer
that has the name ``writer``. It will find this layer in the ``server`` group and load the
``server.writer.yaml`` layer:

.. code-block:: bash

  dodo writer.mk runserver --confirm

      (/tmp/tutorial/writer) make runserver

      confirm? [Y/n]

Of course, to run the reader, we can use ``dodo reader.mk runserver``.

Details: the --trace option
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  We saw above the Dodo Commands applies some magic to find out what command you want to run based
  on the prefixes that you use before the name of the command. To find out what is going on below
  the surface, use the ``--trace`` option to print the result of this translation process
  (without running any commands). For example:

  .. code-block:: bash

    dodo reader.mk runserver --trace

        ['/usr/local/bin/dodo', 'mk', 'runserver', '--layer=server.reader.yaml']

  This tells us that we are actually invoking the command ``dodo mk runserver --layer=server.reader.yaml``.


Details: running the services in tmux
-------------------------------------

We can put the commands to run our services in a menu so we can easily run them
in a tmux session. First, make sure that tmux is installed on your system.
Then, add a ``MENU`` section to the configuration file like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

  # (bottom of) /tmp/tutorial/.dodo_commands/config.yaml
  MENU:
    commands:
      server:
      - dodo writer.mk runserver
      - dodo reader.mk runserver

When we run ``dodo menu --tmux`` we'll open a tmux session that show the menu:

  .. code-block:: bash

    dodo menu --tmux

         1 [server] - dodo writer.mk runserver
         2 [server] - dodo reader.mk runserver

        Select one or more commands (e.g. 1,3-4) or type 0 to exit:

Type ``1,2`` to run both commands. They will open in separate windows inside the tmux screen.
